Some of the worst research we do on
human beings is when we study things in
complete isolation, right? Like when we
take a cell or a compound out of the
human body, we put it in a test tube,
petri dish, you know, and and we study
it in isolation because that's not how
cells behave. It's not how human beings
behave. We operate in communities, not
in isolation. You know, I think that
we're slowly sort of micro poisoning
ourselves to death. You know, in this
country, we use something called single
dose toxicity. I hear people say all the
time, the dosage determines the poison.
And and the dosage doesn't always
determine the poison. It's the
cumulative dosage very often that
determines the poison. 23 major
sunscreen brands since 2020 have been
removed from the shelves because of
their cancer-causing ingredient.
[Music]
Hey, awesome, man. Good to see you, man.
It's good to see you, brother. Yeah. So,
Gary, you taught me something really
cool after I started reading about it.
the documentation was out there, but it
wasn't something that I would have just
found, right? So, most like I I follow
what I call low carb nutrition, which is
really carnivore. But I remember when we
met, you were you were kind of just
starting the carnivore diet and I was
like, "This guy's crazy. He's just going
to eat meat." And then I started looking
into it and I was like, "Right, it
wasn't that crazy. It wasn't that crazy.
It actually makes perfect sense." But
you told me something really important,
which is we were we had a mutual friend
at the time and he would follow the same
thing that I was doing and then every
once in a while he would just kind of go
off the rails and eat like two pieces of
chocolate cake. Yep. And you you looked
at his blood work and you're like, "Hey,
oh yeah, you're you have high LDL
cholesterol," which is normal with
somebody who's on the carnivore diet.
And that in itself may not be a problem.
But when you also have high
triglycerides, yes, now you're having
glycation of arteries. Yeah. Glycation
of arteries and you're shrinking the
particulate size of cholesterol. So
you're making it more dangerous. You
know, easier to to cross that
endothelial lining, right? And get eaten
by a macroofage and start that whole
process, right? You know, I think I
think cholesterol gets blamed for a lot
of crimes that it's not committing,
right? You know, it's like blaming the
firefighter for the fire, you know,
because they're they're on scene, right?
Um but they they didn't light the fire,
right? They're actually chole
cholesterol is kind of there to repair
the the the tissue that you know, the
damage is what caused it. You know, what
called cholesterol to that. Well, and it
it collects at a point of inflammation.
My my analogy is it's like leaves plug
up your drain and cause a flood in your
yard. So, cut down all the trees. No,
maybe just clean your drains. Yeah, I
agree. maybe just not have the leaves
like just sitting right there on top of
the drain. I think that's the problem is
like people with high triglycerides like
you can't be both. You can't be low carb
and then gorge on carbohydrates from
time to time. No, that's the worst thing
in the world or to be keto and then sort
of date the keto diet, not marry it. You
know, it's one of those diets that it's
a oneway street committed to it can have
profound benefits. I mean I think its
origins actually are in the um for
epilepsy originally originally what it
was designed for first discovered but
but you know we can we can run on fats
beta hydroxybutyrate is a is a is a fuel
source like like carbohydrates are and
we can actually run on fats and and for
people that have very high triglycerides
like Dana White when I first met Dana
White you know was a kind of a hard
concept for him to get his arms around
that his triglycerides were at such a
level they were well over 800 fasted by
the way and and I said we're going to
put you on a highfat diet to bring the
fat in your blood down. And he was like,
"Yeah, come again." I was like, "We're
going to put we're just going to try to
put your body into a state of ketosis so
that it really sees fat as a fuel
source." And and and that's what
happened. I mean, week over week, the
the triglycerides just plummeted. You
know, they went from in the, you know,
800s into about 139 after about 10
weeks, you know, in a fasted state. And
so, you know, when that's happening that
you you're actually slightly increasing
the the particle size of LDL
cholesterol, making it a little less
dangerous. You know what's interesting
is when I was in the mortality space and
and this is anecdotal, so I I don't have
a clinical study to back this up, but
you know, we processed death claims and
we would we would triangulate that death
claim back into the the medical record.
I did not see in 22 years a single
centinarian not once that did not have
clinically elevated levels of LDL
cholesterol when they passed because you
know a lot of times they would die in
assisted care living or they would die
in the hospital and they would actually
have recent blood work on them and when
you file a death claim you know we would
get the day the date the time the
location and the cause of death. the
cause of death in many cases was not
cardiac related and we would look at
their blood profile and they would have
elevated LDL cholesterol. They had low
triglycerides. Um and I was like well
why are all these centinarians having
elevated LDL cholesterol? And and I
think a lot of times um because it's not
indicated for an early death. That's
Yeah. I mean I I' I've never seen a
clinical study and I'm sure the haters
are going to come out and prove me wrong
and if they do great. Um, I haven't seen
a study where LDL cholesterol on its own
was directly linked to cardiovascular
disease. Oh, no. There's no mechanisms
whatsoever. I'm going to talk about that
tomorrow. Are you? Okay. Amazing. So, so
that's a, you know, I mean, and and I
think some of the worst research we do
on human beings is when we study things
in complete isolation, right? Like when
we take a cell or a compound out of the
human body, we put it in a test tube,
petri dish, you know, and and we study
it in isolation because that's not how
cells behave. It's not how human beings
behave. We we we we operate in
communities, not in in isolation. In
fact, we knew in the mortality space, if
you wanted to cut a human being's life
expectancy in half at any age, put them
in isolation. Yeah. Sure. Right. I mean,
the same Oh, like during co Yeah. Like
yeah, I mean I I think the worst thing
to happen to us was, you know,
residential quarantining, social
distancing, masking because this just
this took the all the hormatic stress
off the body. Yeah. Right. And and and I
think that, you know, so often we think
about stress as being such a negative
thing, but we know if you don't load a
bone, it doesn't strengthen. If you
don't tear a muscle, it doesn't grow. If
you don't challenge the immune system,
it weakens, right? But we think about
all these things as being stressors and
because I feel like aging is the
aggressive pursuit of comfort that we
aggressively pursue comfort until we
actually age faster. Yeah. Absolutely.
Yeah. We get weaker. Yeah. Uh glycation
I mean glycation is just rapid aging of
every cell. Yeah. Uh, and uh, and I've
been using that word a lot because I
think people are starting to understand
like, wow, it's like really the amount
of junk food I eat. Yeah. Is really just
putting me into a gear, you know, like
shifting you into like the rapid
self-destruction gear. Yeah. Yeah. Um,
and then you and then you have elevated
LDL cholesterol also because your diet's
but you you have ele elevated LDL
cholesterol and then you have all of
this these, you know, this in
inflammation going on. And so they say
blockages. Yeah, LDL cholesterol is that
it's like the firemen example, you know,
don't blame the firemen for the fire. I
mean, they're there to put it out. And
you can't say, well, every time there's
a serious fire, there's a fireman there.
These guys show up so clearly. Yeah.
These guys show up, so we should if we
stop them from showing up, then maybe
we'll stop the damage. But now you have
nobody to put out the fire, right? And
so the idea is to stop the fire from
starting in the first place, right? Is
to stop stop the inflammatory process.
Look at the inflam, right? The
inflammatory process. That's and this is
why you see other things, you know, in
in relation to this too because anytime
you have, you know, inflammation in the
endothelial lining, you know, the the
glycoalix, the endocalix, but the the
glycoalix of the of the artery, you
know, this is usually a systemic issue,
right? Because you know we think that
the skin is the largest organ in the
body but I would sort of differ and say
well you know your skin has the surface
area of about half a tennis court but
the the lining of our arteries has the
surface area of six tennis courts is 12
times the surface area. So imagine if
you get an inflammatory condition in
63,000 miles of blood vessel. You know
what are the downstream consequences of
that? Well, you have this myriad of what
seems to be unrelated consequences, but
they're all coming from inflammatory
condition in this barrier between the
blood and the tissue. And if you, you
know, in the simplest of terms, if if if
nutrients can't leave the blood and
enter the tissue and and waste can't
leave the tissue and enter the blood,
Yeah. That in and of itself is going to
cause such a myriad of seemingly
unrelated consequences that we we chase
them as if they are individual
pathologies, but they're all related to
the same thing, right? You know, just
and and sometimes they manifest
differently. Yeah. When you have a
chronic inflammation, you can you can
have arterial stiffness, you can have
gout, you can have eczema. Like they're
kind of all coming from the same right
source. It's just our genetics really
just determines sort of how it our body
interprets the signals. But really when
you have these inflammatory conditions,
it's like it's obvious it's what you're
putting in your mouth. Yeah. No doubt.
It's what you're putting in your mouth
and what you're swallowing and what
you're breathing. And you know, I think
that we we're we're slowly sort of micro
poisoning ourselves to death. You know,
in this country, we use something called
single dose toxicity. I hear people say
all the time, the dosage determines the
poison. And and the dosage doesn't
always determine the poison. It's the
cumulative dosage very often that
determines the poison. Right? Nobody
nobody got look at carbon monoxide.
Carbon monoxide, mercury poisoning.
Nobody got mercury poisoning from eating
one piece of tuna fish. Um they got
mercury poisoning because they ate
mercury laden tuna fish over and over
and over and over and over again. And
the cumulative toxicity is what, you
know, eventually um caused the the the
the pathology. And I think if if if
maybe we would think about the human
body like a temple and we would develop
this sort of invisible barrier so that
we filter things before it gets to our
temple rather than letting our temple be
the filter. Um you know just that alone
just that vantage point would would
serve us well because we'd start
thinking about tap water and we'd start
thinking about you know our air and we
would start thinking about the food that
we're eating like you know is this going
to serve me or is it going to steal from
me? How about sunscreen? So, I mean,
what is it? TW I I read something the
other day was um I want to get this
quote right, but 23 major sunscreen
brands since 2020 have been have been
removed from the shelves because of
their cancer-causing ingredients. I'm
like, you know, wait a second, sunscreen
is being pulled from the market for
causing cancer. I thought it was
supposed to be cancer preventive. In
fact, I I I think uh you know, most of
us are not getting enough sun. It's not
that we're getting too much sun. I think
that most of us are not getting enough
sun. And um and I'm not talking about
laying out there until you're, you know,
you're barbecued, but you know, the
truth is we're very photovoltaic beings.
Um we get a lot of benefits from
sunlight. Not the UVA and UVB, but you
know, the blue light from the sun, you
know, vitamin D3 and all of the
ancillary products that are made from
sunlight. Um a lot of people don't
realize you don't get all that from a
tanics alone either. No. Like people
think it's the same. No, that's just
high UVA, UVB. I mean you can you you
can target things like you can excite
the the you know the melanin in the skin
but you're not getting those those real
therapeutic nanometers of wavelength
that are you know passing into the
mitochondria and kicking out a gas gas
mitochondrial nitric oxide and forcing
oxygen to dock right I mean causing
cytochrome c oxidase to release this
mitochondrial nitric nitric oxide gas
and then grabbing oxygen which you know
I say that the presence of oxygen is the
absence of disease because oxygen
is really what is the most beneficial
fuel for the mitochondria. And when we
when we put this precious gas into the
mitochondria, we get a 16fold step up in
cellular energy, right? I mean, we have
a 38 ATP instead of two. Well, net 36
ATP instead of 2 ATP, which means that
you have 16 times more cellular energy.
So now you got a cell that can eliminate
waste and repair and detoxify and
regenerate rather than a cell that is
that is starving. And and I think we
often forget too that, you know, when we
eat, we're actually the last in line to
get to be fueled, right? I mean, the
only reason why we eat is to feed our
gut bacteria, right? None of our cells
can use the protein that we ingest or
the carbohydrates that we eat or the
sugars or the fats. What happens is the
bacteria metabolize those, turn those
into compounds that that leave the
luminal wall of the gut and enter the
bloodstream and then those pass through
the cell cell wall and then eventually
they enter the mitochondria and are
turned into right ATP. We're only fueled
by one energy source. So we're kind of
the last in line and we think of food as
fuel, but really ATP is our fuel. So
what is the most beneficial way to get
ATP is how we you know we should I feel
like we should think about it at least
from an aging perspective. Yeah. Right.
is is what is causing accelerated aging?
Well, the the degradation of the
mitochondria, you know, at the end of
the day. No, I want to talk about your
concept that you defend a lot um about
progressive loading. Um because clearly
you're holding a lot of muscle um and
you know, the fact that you use
resistance bands, I think to a lot of
people is uh would be considered a hoax.
you know, we think that we need to move
massive amounts of weight over distance
in order to build muscle. And and and
I've heard you say so many times that
that's such an archaic view of of how
the body strengthens itself. So your
your work was in progressive living.
Well, my work was in osteogenic loading.
Okay. So specific with bone. But when I
saw what would happen to bone under, you
know, when we emulate high impact
forces. So, you know, if I'm going to
absorb high impact forces with my upper
extremities is 120 degree angle of
inclusion between upper and lower arm,
back of the hand is in line with the
clavicle. There's very specific
biomechanics for that. So, when I looked
at the force outputs that people are
capable of, for me, I can I can push
about 2,000 pounds from here to here.
And you know, it's like the human body
is so powerful, yet we don't access any
of that in fitness. And so I started
looking at fitness in general was like
kind of a sore subject with me because I
remember I had been lifting weights for
20 years and I really didn't get much
out of it, right? And pretty much
everybody knew, yeah, I got some I was I
was a little bit better than most
people. I was a little more careful
because I knew more, but still it was
like the results were not there. And uh
I knew some genetic outliers who did
great. Mhm. Uh and then the rest of the
people that worked out all the time,
boy, they look the same every year, just
same same.
And uh it's just like it amazes me with
this the fitness industry how many
people are willing to go year after year
after year and defend what they're
doing. I don't know, maybe because they
think they're badass or something like
that, but I think that it's the ego
thing. It's the I lift dangerous
weights, therefore I'm really tough. And
it's like, no, you have a double chin
and baby arms. You're not tough. You
have a double chin. I say this to people
all the time. Yeah. Yeah. It's like like
where are all these great fit people?
Why is it that that if you know want to
take a random sample of the population,
people at an airport? H it's not perfect
but it's better than just you know going
to a shopping mall because you know
shopping mall or Disney World or Disney
World because there's a demographic you
know splits and whereas an airport
people kind of travel because they have
to. So you go through an airport let's
say you see a thousand people. How many
airports do you need to go through
before you see somebody that's really
fit? A guy or girl you know where you're
like whoa. I've been counting because I
go to a lot of airports right? Yeah. It
takes about 10 trips to an airport. So
today I was at two airports, didn't see
anybody. And so I mean basically it's
like about 10 airports I see one person.
It's bas I I'm I'm determining as far as
fit looking. Now that has nothing to do
with health. But I'm talking about
results that are seen because ultimately
if your fitness program isn't serving
your ego, you're quitting. Yes. It
doesn't matter. like your blood test
looks good and you're like, "Yeah, but I
mean I'm spending hours." And it's just
like I still got a double chin and baby
arms. So like they don't, you know,
they're like, "Okay, whatever." Like
you, you got to look better. Like that's
part of the winning strategy. Yeah. And
if one out of 10,000 people are the ones
that are getting this result, then what
we are doing is ridiculous.
It's probably the most failed and human
failed human endeavor of all, right? Uh
just I mean the amount of time we commit
for the result that we get. Yeah. Right.
It's almost like the definition of
insanity, right? Same thing over and
over again. People just dedicated to
working out. Like the joke about
CrossFit, the only way you know somebody
does CrossFit is they tell you they do
CrossFit. That's why they keep talking
about it. So you never know they work
out by looking at them. Yeah. And I mean
it's not not anything in particular
against CrossFit, though I got plenty of
jokes about CrossFit. It's more it's
more just like what you're doing with
your workouts isn't doing anything. So,
when I went from osteiogenic loading
research and then kind of compared all
that to some of the fitness literature
I've been reading, we don't do with
weights. We're really not engaging very
much. And uh this the new latest thing
that people are just running around like
halfjacked off dogs about is this long
range repetitions or lengthened
partials. So like like really making
sure that you're loading the stretch
position of the muscle and it's like
what okay I this is true it's very
important however where do you go to
fatigue when you lift anything in the
weakest range of motion the weakest
range of motion the weakest link in the
chain whatever analogy you want to put
on it it's the we this is the weak part
right so saying that's where all the
stimulus is it's like No, that's just
where you go to fatigue.
So, if you didn't go to fatigue here,
that probably means you didn't go to
fatigue at all. Right? So, I it's it's
just like almost like a child's argument
like, yay, we found the anabolic
position, but no, fatigue is what's
important. Now, with variable
resistance, when you I'm doing a chest
press, I go to fatigue in the strongest
range of motion first, and then I keep
doing repetitions until I can't get
there. So, I went to fatigue there. Now,
I shorten the repetitions. Now, I'm
going to fatigue in a slightly less
strong position. Then, I continue to go
so I may go to fatigue 10 separate times
in one exercise, full range of motion.
And most people never go to fatigue. M.
So, it's it's not that bands are magic
and weights are stupid. It's that your
brain and your central nervous system is
wired for safety. And if you can go to
fatigue in a diminishing range, your
body won't stop you from hurting
yourself cuz you won't. Therefore, you
actually get the same kind of training
stimulus as these genetic outliers who
fire more muscle in their weaker range.
It's really the difference between
people who end up in the NFL and the
rest of us. You're taking advantage of
what? The neural inhibition, right? I
mean, the the lack of neural inhibition.
Yeah, the lack of neural inhibition,
right? The only other person who uses
that term. Thank you. Oh, you're
welcome. Oh, yeah. People accuse me of
making that term up and it's just like,
no, it's in all kinds of like
neurological. Well, I mean, that's the
reason why we can't make a fist in so
hard that we tear them. Squeeze a fist
hard enough to break your own finger,
right? Can't do it. or or tear your no,
you know, muscle from the Everyone has
enough strength to break their own
finger by squeezing a fist, but your
body won't let you do it because it's
got a self-preservation mechanism called
neural inhibition. That's right. Yeah.
Amazing. So, you can take advantage of
the lack of by fatiguing yourself
through an entire range of motion. And
you're probably also, you know, the name
of the game here is tear my tissue. So,
you're tearing more myophibal tissue,
you know, for the same amount of time.
Would you say I say stimulating them for
stimulating? Yeah. Because the whole
micro tear thing that's it's kind of
sometimes running in parallel, but like
marathon runners get more micro tears
than weightlifterss do, but they don't
grow any muscle, right? So that's I see
that as sort of factorulation. Yeah.
It's just it's when the central nervous
system looks at a cell and says, "Okay,
this cell's done. We can't use it
anymore." It's it's reached the
stimulation point and then it's called
out. which is why as you lift you're
you're going through repetition after
repetition you're getting weaker. And
what about the whole time under tension
theory? And so time under tension it
like it's important but what we're
really doing is time under variable
tension. So you want to get as much
loading work done in a given amount of
time or the same amount of time. You
want to do more loading work. And that's
like the app that connects to the the X3
bar that's wired, you know, it's it's
got the connection. You're looking to
create more total force each set you do
or each workout you do because you do
one just one set per per movement,
right? That which is amazing. I mean, we
call it one set, but it's it's a hell of
a set. Yeah. It's drinking from the fire
hose. Yeah. It's it's And your body is
not wired to stop you. Yeah. Your body
is wired to stop you when you lift
weights because it's dangerous. You
know, I remember we went to Dr. Mcola's
house in in um Daytona, was it Daytona
Beach? Daytona Beach. We went to Dr.
Mcola's house in Daytona Beach and you
you were installing some osteo strong
equipment in there and um and we took
him through the Xar workout. I was
actually very surprised. X3, sorry, X-3,
um, workout and I was very surprised at
the density that he had in his muscle
tissue because at the time I was heavily
training for triathlon, okay? And we did
the same workout and I was like, here's
this guy. He's like 10 years older than
I am. He's very thin, but he strong,
he's so freaking strong. I was like,
this is embarrassing, you know? It's
Well, he he had done variable resistance
training for years. Yeah. With chains.
So, he had a he had a gym he went to and
uh what they do is you know how the
chains Well, we'll explain it. Yeah. The
heavier and they Yeah. Like you have a a
barbell and it's on each end is
connected to two piles of equal chains
and as you lift it, you're picking up
more big links and we're we're talking
like like battleship anchor chain, like
really heavy chains. And so as you're
picking up more links, each one of those
links weighs like 10 pounds or seven
pounds or something like that. And so
it's heavy as you go far from the floor
and as you get closer to the floor it's
lighter. So he had been training like
that. So as soon as he saw X3 it was
just like this makes sense. Obvious like
I just remember him one of these is
living in my suitcase doing the front
squats and I was like dude this guy's
already done like 12 more reps than I
could ever do. Yeah. And yeah, he went
right to the heaviest band first. He
went right to the heaviest band first.
That was amazing. So I mean clearly it
works. It works even in older ages. And
I think if you want to live a long time
you got to lift heavy things. You got to
put you got to put the body. There's no
getting away from heavy. Yeah. Like you
have to put heavy loads through the
body. And with variable resistance, your
body's just not afraid of it. Yeah. It
welcomes it. It you're you're more lit
up when you do a variable resistance
set. And here's the weird thing. When I
get stopped in airports, usually when
some some, you know, troll sees you in
person, they kind of don't come at you
like wanting to yell in your face.
Like, so I get approached in airports
all the time and I can tell if
somebody's a bodybuilder or a
powerlifter just by the question they
ask because the bodybuilders are like,
"Hey, like, do you secretly lift
weights?" And you know, cuz they in
their mind it's like weights are
everything. But a powerlifter, they've
trained with variable resistance, some
of them partially, most of them, almost
all of their training variable
resistance. Uh, you look at Westside
barbell. Westside barbell did one thing
differently. two the the sitting down on
the box during the squat. That's one
thing that people had done that before,
but they made it cool. So, they actually
rested and then exploded. Basically,
your butt fully touches the seat because
it's you want to make sure your legs go
parallel cuz they're training for the
squat as a sport, you know, as an event.
So, you got to get it just right. And I
think neurologically that's that's a
good thing. Uh if you're not training
for the squat, then it doesn't matter.
But the other thing was bands. They put
bands on all the bars. Heavy users of
variable resistance. In only a few
years, and this currently stands,
Westside Barbell has more world records
than any country on earth, including the
United States. I did not if you took
Westside out of the United States,
right? And the answer is variable
resistance. And I know some somebody
will be like, well, they also, you know,
whatever. Okay, sure. They did some
other I guess. I mean, there were
natural athletes there and enhanced
athletes, but but they're natural and
enhanced athletes all over the rest of
the world, but weren't doing variable
resistance. So, to me, it's very
obvious. And the good news is I've never
met somebody who gave X3 an honest shot
and wasn't completely hands down like
doing that as their main strength
workout. Now, like some of the pro
athletes I work with, uh, the Miami
Heat, they're 100% X3, but they still
have to do their drills and, you know,
you got to be Yeah, I think sometimes I
say that and maybe the, you know, the
clip for Instagram just ends right there
and it's just like, see, fraud. Oh,
really? The Miami Heat's not shooting
baskets anymore? Yeah, of course they
are. But as far as the just the strength
uh and also like prehabbing joints,
building thicker tendons and ligaments
is great research. Uh Benjamin and
Ralph's 1998 K's going to laugh because
I quote that all the time. Um your your
tendons and ligaments get thicker. Your
joint capsule becomes more powerful when
you hyperload that strong position. And
we do it at osteo strong and to a lesser
degree it happens with X3. This is
awesome. Yeah. Because the the weight
climbs as you get into that range of
motion.